---
layout: none
title:  "Caste"
bookauthor:  "Isabel Wilkerson"
startdate:
date: 2021-03-13
mode: "Libby audiobook"
categories: books
---

I thought this book was terrible. It was unclear to me what she was trying to
say. It seemed that the central thesis of the book was that it was somehow
illuminating to call race in America "caste" and to use that to tie it to the
Indian caste system and Nazi racial theories. However, she doesn't really argue
the point at length, and the book really seems to be a long list of well-known
American racial injustices, with occasional references to the Indian, Nazi
examples.

Two issues with the thesis of the book:

1) Just relabeling race as "caste" and replacing "white people" with "people of
the dominant caste" doesn't add anything to the conversation. Maybe you could
make an argument that doing so is a literary technique, comparable to
Kafka/Nabokov defamiliarization, but I don't think that's the intention, nor is
it successful. She doesn't provide a super clear definition of caste, or how it
might differ from the common understanding of racism in America, but I think
it's pretty clear that all the examples she gives fit exactly in the common
conception of American racism. Yes, racism means that you think that one group
is better than another. Yes, it's stupid and arbitrary. But what does calling
it caste actually achieve, other than conflating American racism with other,
distinct traditions of prejudice, whose differences with American racism are
more prominent than their similarities, which leads us to 

2) Nazi persecution of Jews strikes me as a crazy example to compare against
American persecution of blacks. How much can really be learned from the
comparison to a subgroup that, until the decade before WWII, constituted a
significant fraction of German intellectual, economic and political leading
figures, and were widely accepted as a part of the German social elite.
Obviously there's a long standing history of anti-Semitism in Germany (and
Europe), but it was perhaps _because_ of the group's success and distinction
that they were susceptible to becoming targets of public condemnation. I feel
like that the Jewish experience in the Third Reich is more clearly seen as a
opportunistic scapegoating that took advantage of longstanding anti-elitist and
racial resentments than anything resembling a caste system.

I know less about the Indian caste system,
but there's no deep exploration of it in the book, and I get the sense that the
intricacies of it are white-washed in its identification with the American
Black experience. Also, South African apartheid is mentioned off-hand a few
times in the book, but why isn't that a principal focus, when it seems like a
much clearer analogue than either the Nazi or Indian examples. Also, I thought
that the personal anecdotes she reported (experience de-boarding a flight, poor
service in a restaurant, uncooperative then-friendly plumber) really didn't
help to build her case. While all of those certainly could have been due to the
perpetrator's racism, it's also totally imaginable that these people had
different reasons for treating her poorly (because she's a woman, because they
were tired and working long shifts in tiring jobs, because she wasn't friendly,
etc.) and a lack of emotional curiosity about those people detracts from the
credibility of her examples.

I'd love to understand why the book has received such universal praise.
